[MUSIC PLAYING]
[APPLAUSE]
>> What I love about researching
the brain in our biology is
that it has allowed me to
present the latest findings
of what's humanly possible
to millions of people around
the world.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I've learned that we're
not hardwired to be
a certain way for the
rest of our lives,
and we're not
doomed by our genes.
In fact, we are
marvels of change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
My job as a doctor for 31 years,
as well as a lecturer, author,
and researcher is to not just
talk about what is possible,
but to show you the latest
data that supports my work.
That your thoughts can have
an effect on your brain,
your body, and your life.
This is a time in history
where it's not enough to know.
This is a time in
history to know how.
I'm Dr. Joe Dispenza,
and I'm going to show you
how to rewire your brain.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
I want to start off by asking
you a strange question--
what does it mean to
you to be supernatural?
To me, being
supernatural is to be
able to change your
body by thought alone.
To say it another way, it means
being greater than your body.
Being supernatural also
means overcoming challenges
and conditions in
your outer environment
that most people would
not be able to accomplish.
In addition, being
supernatural would also
mean to be able to change some
predictable future destiny
or event.
That is, to be
greater than time.
Now is this
something that's only
reserved for ancient
yogis, mystical masters,
and superheroes?
Is it fantasy, or is
there medical proof
that each human being has the
potential to heal themselves,
and in a sense, to
become supernatural?
In 1986, I had my own
personal experience
that forever changed my life.
A serious injury forced me
to meld together everything
I knew from my scientific
mind and my training
to a greater level
of understanding
about the nature of reality
and what is possible.
Much of what I
discovered was not
found in conventional textbooks
and mainstream science.
In fact, I had to find answers
for my own personal healing
by delving into areas
of science that point
the finger at possibility.
I want to invite you into a
journey and a scientific study
of your mind, your
heart, and your body
with a series called "Rewired."
So let's start with some
basics about the brain
that you should know
right from the very start.
I want to offer you a new
way of concept in your brain.
Think of your brain as
three brains in one.
You literally have
three brains that
allow you to go from
thinking to doing to being.
So let's start off
with your first brain,
called your neocortex.
Your neocortex is the seat
of your conscious mind.
It's the largest
and most evolved
in human beings and dolphins.
This is the part of your
brain that plugs you
into three dimensional reality.
It's divided into different
regions and different areas.
So the front of the brain,
called the forebrain,
makes up 40% of
your entire brain.
It's the largest
in human beings,
and it's what separates
us from all other species.
The next closest species,
gibbons and chimpanzees,
their frontal lobe is about
14% to 17%, dogs about 7%,
and cats about 3%.
Now the frontal
lobe has been known
to be called the area
of executive function.
But think of the frontal
lobe as the CEO of the brain
or the symphony leader.
The frontal lobe allows
us to decide on action,
to focus our concentration,
to invent, to speculate,
to have intention or attention.
It's the area of our
brain that restrains
our emotional
reactions or begins
to speculate new possibilities.
So think of your frontal lobe
as the seat of your conscience
or your creative center.
Now, the rest of the brain
is divided up into geography
as well.
For example, the
back of your brain,
called the occipital lobe
or the visual cortex,
is where you process sight
or spatial orientation.
There's strips and
areas of your brain
that allow you to feel
certain things with your body
or to invoke or begin to
initiate motor function
or movement.
They're areas of
the brain that allow
you to make long-term memories
and to begin to distinguish
between self and non-self.
But the entire brain is
mapped geographically,
and think of that first
brain as that part
of the brain that allows
you to learn new things
and to have new experiences.
So then every time you
learn something new,
you make new connections
in your brain.
Learning is forging new
synaptic connections.
In some of the latest
research in neuroscience
that says that one hour of
focused concentration on one
concept or idea
literally doubles
the number of connections
in your brain,
literally produces
physical evidence
as a result of your
interaction in the environment.
So then all of this philosophy,
this intellectual data,
this theory, this knowledge is
stored in that neocortex called
your thinking brain.
Now, the next step is
to take that knowledge,
that philosophy, and to begin
to apply it, to personalize it,
to demonstrate it, to initiate
that knowledge in some way.
And if you do this properly
and you can get your behaviors
to match your intentions,
you can get your actions
equal to your thoughts.
You can get your mind and
body working together,
you're going to have
a new experience.
Now when you're in the
midst of an experience,
all of your five senses plug
you into the environment.
And as all of that
sensory information
rushes back to your
brain, jungles of neurons
begin to organize themselves
into patterns and networks.
So then experience then enriches
the philosophical circuits
in your brain, and when
those neurons begin
to form into networks,
the second brain,
called the limbic brain,
the emotional brain,
the chemical brain,
the mammalian brain,
begins to make a chemical,
and that chemical is
called a feeling or an emotion.
So the moment you
feel unlimited,
the moment you feel
abundant, the moment you
feel free from any
experience, now you
are teaching your
body chemically
to understand what your mind
has intellectually understood.
So we can say that knowledge is
for the mind and experience is
for the body.
And in that moment,
you embodying
the truth of that philosophy.
And because there's new
information coming in
from the environment,
you're literally
beginning to change your
genetic destiny by signaling
new genes in new ways.
And it is the limbic brain
or the chemical brain
that begins to manufacture
those chemicals so
that your body begins to
become chemically instructed
to understand which your mind
has intellectually understood.
Now the limbic brain also
has some other functions.
It is the seat of your
autonomic nervous system.
And think of your
autonomic nervous system
as your automatic
nervous system.
This is the part of the brain
that subconsciously regulates
blood sugar levels, hormone
levels, temperature,
respiration, heart rate.
This is the part
of the brain that's
giving us life automatically.
And so then when you begin
to manufacture that chemical
from an experience,
the emotional signature
from that experience begins to
change your body in some way.
If you've been able to
create that experience once,
you should be able
to recreate it again.
And if you're able to recreate
any experience over and over
again, you are going to
begin to neurochemically
condition your mind and
body begin to work as one.
And if you've done
something so many times
that your body now knows how
to do it as well as your mind,
now it's innate in you.
It's second nature.
It's easy.
It's automatic.
It's familiar.
In fact, you've done
it so many times
that you no longer have to
consciously think about it.
So it begins to become
a subconscious program.
So then you know
you do it but you
don't know how you know how.
And we could say now that you're
developing a skill or a habit.
In other words, you're beginning
to master that philosophy,
and you're moving into
a new state of being.
And when you do this
properly, over and over again,
you activate that third
brain called your cerebellum.
This is the part of the
brain that's responsible
for you beginning
to develop what's
called implicit memories
or nondeclarative memories.
Where you've done
something so many times
that you no longer have the
conscious who think about it.
It's who you are.
So our job then is
to go from knowledge
to experience to wisdom.
From mind to body to soul.
From learning it with your head,
applying it with your hands,
and knowing it by heart.
And I can tell you that
common people around the world
are doing the uncommon when
they follow this formula.
They're healing themselves
of near-fatal diseases.
They're reversing cancers.
They're healing from
childhood scars and wounds.
They're creating new
jobs, new opportunities,
and they're having
mystical experiences that
transcend language, and
they look just like you.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Let's talk about different
ways on how the brain works.
Number one, we've
all heard that when
you lose a certain number
of neurons in your brain
that those neurons
will never come back.
But there is an emerging field
of science called neurogenesis,
and neurogenesis literally means
"the growth of new neurons."
And our research
has found that when
people begin to learn new
things and have new experiences,
not only will they
begin to cultivate
new synaptic connections
in their brain,
but they will actually flourish
the growth of new neurons
as a result of those novel
experiences and learning.
And we've even discovered
that within four days,
we begin to activate
the very gene that
processes that change.
So, the studies that were
done in the early 1900s
said that no neurons
can grow in the brain.
Those scientists
were studying rodents
in an unchanging environment.
So if rodents are in an
unchanging environment
and there's no new stimulation,
there's no new activities,
there's no new experiences,
then their brains
will stay the same.
Now let's talk about you.
If you think the same
thoughts every single day,
and for the most
part, most people--
80% to 90% of their thoughts
are the same thoughts as the day
before.
In your biology, your neural
circuitry, your neurochemistry,
your hormones, and even
your gene expression
is equal to how you think,
how you act, and how you feel.
In other words, everything
stays the same in the body
if you stay the same.
Well, it begs the question
then, is it possible
that new thoughts that
lead to new choices, that
lead to new behaviors, that
create new experiences, that
lead to new emotions and new
feelings, that could inspire
new thoughts begin to
change your biology,
would you begin to see
significant changes
in the brain as
well as the body?
And our research proves
that when you change,
everything changes around you.
The second concept
I want to talk about
is the concept of coherence.
And think about coherence
as rhythm or order
or synchronization.
People who live by the hormones
of stress on a daily basis--
and for the most part, that's
70% of the time for most
human beings--
and when you're
living in stress,
you're living in survival.
And when you're
perceiving some threat
in your external environment
where you perceive a danger
and you have the perception of
something that could get worse,
it turns on that
primitive nervous system
called your fight or
flight nervous system.
And when you're
in stress, you're
always trying to control
or predict an outcome.
So people who live under
the gun of those chemicals,
those emergency chemicals,
are shifting their attention
very quickly from one
person in their life
to another person in
their life, to something
at some place at some time,
to meetings, to places
they have to go.
And every single one
of those elements
that are known in their
external environment
are neurological networks that
are reflected in their brain.
So under the urgency and the
arousal of the stress hormones,
we begin to shift our attention
from one person to one thing,
we activate these
individual circuits.
And like a lightning
storm in the clouds,
the brain begins to fire out
of order very incoherently.
And when the brain is
incoherent, you're incoherent.
And when the brain
isn't working right,
you're not working right.
And it's this state that
begins to cause the brain
to function like a house
divided against itself.
Different compartments of the
brain no longer synchronize.
And we found the
formula to teach people
how to create more order and
more coherence in their brain.
And when they do this
properly, without the aid
of some type of
drug, medication,
or some type of
external therapy,
if they just practice
that formula,
that can begin to make
their brain work better.
When your brain is
functioning right,
you begin to see the
world very differently.
And so coherence then
is when the brain
starts to unify those different
communities of neurons
that were once subdivided.
All of a sudden, you see
the front of the brain start
resonating and
begin to oscillate
with the back of the brain.
You see the right
side of the brain
starts synchronizing with
the left side of the brain,
and the brain is
starting to function
in a more holistic state.
And what syncs in the
brain links in the brain,
and all of a sudden, you
start feeling more whole.
By the same means,
when a person is
living by the
hormones of stress,
there's only three things
that primitive nervous system
wants to do when you're
living in survival--
to run, to fight, or to hide.
And because social mores say
you can't fight, you can't run,
or you can't hide, many times,
people are stepping on the gas
because that emergency system
is telling them to act.
And yet they're in
a business meeting,
they're in a car
with their children,
they're on the
phone with somebody,
and it's those
stress hormones that
are beginning to activate the
heart to race, because blood
needs to be pumped to the
extremities in that state.
But you're stepping on the
gas, and at the same time,
you're stepping on the
brake, and the heart starts
to function incoherently.
And when your heart
functions incoherently,
you stop trusting yourself.
And all of a sudden
then, the heart
begins to send very, very
inconsistent messages
to the brain and
the person starts
to move into disease
or imbalance.
And so teaching people then
how to create heart coherence
and to create brain coherence
and to synchronize coherence
between their heart
and their brain
begins to make
significant changes,
not only in their health,
but in their life.
And by the same
means, that when you
begin to create brain
and heart coherence,
there's more energy
going to the brain.
And that energy then
is causing the brain
to function from a
greater level of awareness
or a greater level
of consciousness.
And I want to show you in
this series how much energy.
The brain can tolerate when you
start moving into these states.
And not just a little
change in energy,
but a significant
change in energy.
This is happening independent
of using some diet
or changing something
about yourself or exercise.
This is about by
thought alone being
able to create more
order and communication
between your heart
and your brain.
And when you do, you have
more energy in your brain
to execute in your life.
To be more present, to
make better decisions,
to think beyond the
limitations or the conditions
in your environment.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In order for people
to truly begin
to make significant
changes in their life,
they have to get beyond
the memory of themselves.
Now let's talk about that.
Your personality creates
your personal reality,
and your personality is made up
of how you think, how you act,
and how you feel.
So the present
personality called
you who's watching
this show has created
the present personal
reality called your life.
Which means if you
wanted to create
a new personal
reality or a new life,
you would have to
change your personality.
And as you begin to think
about how you've been thinking,
notice how you've been acting,
and you begin to pay attention
to how you've been
feeling, the act
of observing those
states of mind and body
begins to disconnect from
everything known in your life.
So if you wanted to create
something new in your life,
you would have to get
beyond your present identity
or personality.
And when you begin to
apply this formula,
you'll begin to see significant
changes, not only within you,
but in the world around you.
And so we've done
extensive research
to show that people can do this
in a very short amount of time.
In fact, we had a
university in Australia
on the Gold Coast called
Bond University take
a look at thousands
of our brain scans.
And they found
that our community
of people that had
their brains measured
were able to accomplish
this feat in 4 seconds
and 9 seconds and 15 seconds.
In other words, they've
developed the skill
on how to get beyond
their analytical mind,
get beyond their personality in
order to create something new.
We also have done
measurements to show
that 80% of the people that
had their brain measured
had more than 90%
change in their brain
for the better just by
applying this formula.
I can also tell you
in studying brains,
in the process of change
and transformation,
that when you're
analyzing your life
within some disturbing
emotion that you're
going to make your
brain worse every time.
Now think about this--
emotions are a
record of the past.
They are the end product
of past experiences.
And if you're living your life
from some familiar emotion,
and that emotion
typically is driven
by the hormones
of stress, as long
as you're thinking
within that emotion,
we could say then you
are thinking in the past.
That the solution
to your problems
is not thinking
within that emotion.
It's getting beyond
yourself and beginning
to get beyond the
emotion, and when you do,
you get beyond your
past, and now you're
no longer viewing your
future or yourself
through the lens of the past.
The side effect of that is that
you begin to see possibilities
that you never saw before.
So then, teaching people
how to get beyond themselves
and teaching them how to cease
the normal analytical processes
of how we begin to change and
teach them another way to do it
begins to produce significant
and measurable changes
in their life.
In other words, it takes
a long time for you
as a personality to
change your personality.
It takes a long time for
the ego to change the ego.
some subconscious program
or some habit to
change some habit.
But the formula
that we teach people
on how to get beyond
themselves allows
them to become so conscious
that they're no longer immersed
in the personality
of somebody else,
and that is the
first step to change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
So how is this
information changing
the way we look at the world
when we go from thinking
to doing to being?
I can stand here and tell
you that when people begin
to learn the proper information,
and when you combine
a little quantum physics
with a little neuroscience
with a little psychoneuro
immunology with a little bit
of epigenetics, all
of those sciences
point the finger at possibility.
So as people begin
to learn information
and they can explain that
information to someone,
they're beginning to install
the neurological hardware
in their brain in preparation
for an experience.
They're making their brain
fire in new sequences,
in new patterns, in
new combinations.
And whenever you make your
brain work differently,
you're changing your mind.
And the more that they
understand what they're doing
and why they're doing
it, the how gets easier.
And the antithesis
is also true too.
If you can't explain
that information,
it's not wired in your brain.
So the purpose of the
explanation process then,
as we add new stitches
into the three dimensional
tapestry of our gray
matter, is we're doing this
because we want to
install that circuitry
so that nothing is
left to conjecture.
Nothing is left to superstition.
Nothing is left to dogma.
That when people understand
exactly what they're doing
and why and they assign
more meaning to it,
they put more
intention behind it
and they get greater outcomes.
So once people can
understand that information
from an intellectual,
theoretical understanding
in their thinking
neocortex, if I
can set up the conditions
in the environment
and give them the proper
instructions and making it
their behaviors to
match their intentions
and their actions equal
to their thoughts,
when they get their mind
and body working together,
they have some type
of transformation.
So what's the side
effect of this process?
We're seeing common
people around the world
doing the uncommon.
In a sense, becoming
supernatural.
And I'm talking about healing
from chronic health conditions,
from cancer, to diabetes, to
Parkinson's disease, to lupus,
to spinal cord injuries,
traumatic brain injuries,
to anxiety, to depression, and
even rare genetic disorders
that medical science has
had no solution for .
And when they reach
this point, they're
stepping back into their
lives supernatural.
And what does that mean?
They are greater
than their bodies.
than the conditions
in their environment,
and now they're
in a whole new line of time.
And as a result, not
only do they change,
but their life changes as well.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Now that you have
this basic information
on how the brain works,
I'd like to take you
on a journey on how to
use it to create change
and how to apply
it to your life.
In the next episode,
I want to dive
into what it truly means to
change and why so many of us
find it so hard to change.
I'm your host Dr. Joe
Dispenza for "Rewired,"
and I hope to see you on
the next episode, where
we go beyond the ordinary
into the extraordinary.
[MUSIC PLAYING]